The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Marriage of William Durrant, by
Ray Cummings

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Marriage of William Durrant

Author: Ray Cummings

Release Date: February 6, 2022 [eBook #67342]

Language: English

Produced by: Roger Frank and Sue Clark. This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Internet Archive.

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARRIAGE OF WILLIAM DURRANT ***


                      Marriage of William Durrant

                           By Ray Cummings


[Illustration]

My marriage has been a failure. I am one of those unfortunate men with
whom fate deals unjustly. I tried my best. I started with plenty of
opportunity, with what I thought was every chance of success. I
worked the whole thing out carefully—I knew what was necessary for our
happiness and I went after it, sanely and unswervingly. I lacked
neither ambition nor purpose; I did not shirk hard work.

I did my best always—the best both for her and for me. And I lost. The
woman I loved and trusted—trusted too much, I know now—deceived me. My
honor has been trampled under foot—my marriage wrecked in spite of the
fact I did everything I could to make it a success.

I shall tell you about it plainly, just as it occurred.

                  *       *       *       *       *

My name is William Durrant; I was born in Philadelphia thirty-two
years ago. My family was prominent in Philadelphia society; my mother
a woman of superior culture and a very great social ambition.

I received a university education and then entered my father’s
business—wholesale neckwear. My mother died soon after this, and as I
had no brothers or sisters—or in fact any near relatives—my father and
I were drawn very close together.

It was then I learned for the first time the true state of my father’s
affairs. I can remember perfectly that evening when he had his first
intimate talk with me; it was about two months after my mother died.

“Sit down, Will,” he began. We were in the library of the old Durrant
mansion on Arch Street. “I want to talk to you—seriously.”

We drew our chairs together before the fire and I lighted a cigarette.

“You’re not a child any more, Will,” he went on. “You’re nearly
twenty-six—a man.” He laid his hand on mine with more evidence of
affection than I had ever had from him before. “We’re all alone
now—you and I. There are many things you don’t understand—and I want
you to—for we must be very close to each other now.”

I waited, wondering.

“You think we’re rich, don’t you? Your mother did, and God knows I was
not the one to undeceive her.” He laughed a little bitterly, glancing
around the luxuriously furnished room.

“We have always had luxury. Your mother demanded it, Will—it was her
life. The Philadelphia Durrants! Luxury—social prestige—I have
maintained them, all these years—at what a cost!” He passed his hand
across his eyes wearily.

“It’s all a sham, Will—a sham. But now it’s over—there’s only you and
me to please. The bubble is broken. Only you and me—and the wreck of a
business for us to save.” He raised his hand to check my sharp
exclamation.

“I have hidden this from you, Will. But we won’t go into that now—it’s
unimportant.

“I want to talk of you. For twenty-six years you have been scarcely
under my guidance. I cannot blame your mother—only myself. I’ve known
the sort of life you’ve been leading away from home—the sort of
friends you have—the women—” He raised his hand again, and his voice
rose sharply.

“Did you think I didn’t know about the money you lost at cards, and
your mother gave you, time and time again? Do you think I’m ignorant
of the fact that you—my son—are to-day in the way of becoming a
wastrel? Do you think so?”

I laughed. “You’re crazy.”

His face softened; he put his hand again over mine. “I cannot blame
you—only myself. It is the way you were brought up. But I want you to
change, Will. I want you to see yourself and me as we are—I want you
to love me. We will work together, you and I—work to find some of the
good things in life—the real things. I know we’ll find them if we
try—if we really pull together.”

Three weeks later he was dead.

This talk with my father, and one or two others we had subsequently,
made a great impression on me. When he died of pneumonia, after an
illness of only a few days, leaving me utterly alone in the world, I
resolved to take his advice, for my own good, and act differently. The
business he left me was indeed in a precarious condition. He had drawn
from it heavily during the last ten years to meet my mother’s
demands—and more lately, mine—and handicapped thus by a depleted
capital it was going down-hill rapidly.

I realized then that life was not worth living unless one were
rich—really rich—for money held everything desirable. My father was
right—the social prestige my mother had maintained was a sham. Without
the solidity of real wealth it could never be anything but a bubble
that might burst at any moment. I resolved then to settle down; to
work untiringly at this business that had been left me.

I found, when my father’s affairs had been settled up, a truly
astounding number of debts. It has never been my way to do things by
halves; I sold the Arch Street house, settled the debts, and moved the
business and myself to New York for a fresh start.

The two years that followed I devoted exclusively to work and saw
myself in a fair way, ultimately, to succeed in my ambition. I lived
for business during these two years—I did nothing else—I thought of
nothing else. The pleasures of life that I had given up I did not
begrudge. They were only postponed. This was my big chance—my only
chance for wealth and happiness through life—and I was unwilling to do
even the smallest thing to jeopardize it.

Then I met Ruth Wilson, and six months later we were married. She was
five years younger than I—a girl with beauty, of a family nearly the
equal of the Durrants, and with all the social graces—in a word, a
girl of whom any man might be proud.

I knew she would make me a good wife; it was a safe, satisfactory step
for me to take. I was glad of this, for I was now as cautious of the
things I did as formerly I had been careless.

We took an apartment on Riverside Drive, and were very happy. We had
no children. I do not like children; I cannot stand their crying. And
besides they are difficult and expensive to bring up properly—father’s
arraignment of me in my younger days showed me that—and it was obvious
that no girl of the grace and beauty of Ruth should be so handicapped.
That she disagreed with me did not alter my opinion, for I realized
that she was hardly more than a child and could not understand things
as I did.

Our life during these first years of marriage was very satisfactory. I
worked all day at the office, and two or three nights a week played in
a game of cards which we held regularly at the club. I did not
introduce these men to Ruth—they were not her kind—she would not have
understood them. Indeed I should not have played in the game at all,
except that I found the mental relaxation stimulating and helpful to
me, for I was at this time working very hard. My luck, too, seemed to
have changed permanently for the better. Whereas in Philadelphia I had
frequently lost, I now won steadily—sums sufficiently large to justify
in themselves, the amount of time I gave to the pursuit.

Once or twice a week Ruth and I would go to the theater—to musical
shows generally, for I liked them best—and occasionally we would play
cards with friends. This latter diversion interested me not at all. I
was having enough of card playing outside, and the people to whom Ruth
introduced me were particularly uninteresting. I had no time then for
their chatter about art or music, or the books or plays or operas they
seemed determined to discuss. The whole thing bored me immensely, and
probably, because I do not believe in hypocrisy, I did not hesitate to
let them see how I felt.

We did not leave New York for the summer months, except twice we spent
a week or two at one of the big Atlantic City hotels. My business
would have permitted me to leave for longer periods, but I did not
feel that we should spend so much money.

One summer Ruth thoughtlessly suggested that we get away into the
Maine woods and ramble, or to take a canoe trip somewhere. I explained
to her how foolish that was—how she particularly, a girl of breeding,
used to luxury, would not care for that in the way we could afford to
do it. Camping was all right, if it were done properly. We Durrants
once had a big camp in the Adirondacks—my grandfather had established
it. There, with the proper staff of servants and with guests of the
right kind one might rough it comfortably. But my father had given up
that camp, and such things were, as yet, quite beyond my means.

I pointed out all this to Ruth, showing her plainly how illogical she
was. And so we stayed in town.

These years, as I have said, were working out very satisfactorily to
Ruth and me. I was getting my business on its feet and the time when
we could enjoy some of the real luxuries of life did not now seem so
very far distant. That Ruth should be so impatient at the delay had
never occurred to me until one day, when we had been married about
three years, she spoke of it.

“Are you going to keep on indefinitely this way, Will?” she asked
quietly.

This was apropos of the fact that she wanted me to take her that
evening to the opera. I disliked opera intensely—it seems to me an
extremely morbid—not to say boring—form of amusement. And besides this
was one of the nights our card game was on. I could not explain that
to Ruth—she would not have realized how much more important to our
ultimate good my evening’s winnings would be than a mere evening at
the opera—which in itself was expensive.

“I’m going to the club,” I answered.

“Then I shall call up Gerald Rolf and ask him to take me,” she said.

She still spoke quietly. That was one of Ruth’s peculiarities, I was
soon to discover; she concealed her feelings beneath a quiet,
dignified reserve. I would rather a woman came right out plainly with
what was in her mind. Then you can meet her with logic.

“That’s agreeable to me,” I rejoined, and went to the club.

I have not mentioned Gerald Rolf. He was a good-natured sort of boy—at
least I considered him so at that time—a year or so older than Ruth.
He was an artist, painted weird-looking landscapes, and to make his
living, did magazine illustrating. When Ruth first introduced him to
me I thought he was a nice enough boy, except that his interminable
piano-playing was a nuisance.

I was soon undeceived about Gerald Rolf, soon made to realize how
uncertain is happiness and how even the most innocent circumstances
may become a menace to a married man so easy-going, so tolerant as I.

Ruth seemed to like Rolf immensely, although why I could not imagine.
I had one or two long talks with him. He knew nothing about
business—indeed even the simplest things seemed quite beyond his
mental capacity.

I tried to get him to discuss poker—he said he played it a little. But
the mathematical laws of chance that govern the game he did not grasp
at all.

“I’m afraid you’ve got me out of my depth, Durrant,” he said, and
laughed.

Then he wanted me to play a game of chess, which I cannot conceive any
rational-minded person being interested in.

Gerald Rolf came to our home frequently after that, often on the
evenings I was out. I should have objected to this; but I did not. I
admit this fault freely. I saw their intimacy growing, but I was so
trustful, so confident of Ruth, I did nothing to prevent it.

He was teaching her chess, he said. And she sang a little to his piano
accompaniment, weird sort of songs—nothing bright or lively of the
kind I liked. And they went to the opera together sometimes—“in the
gallery,” as he laughingly told me, for like all artists he had no
money. Then later, they took to horseback riding. But this was
expensive, and they rode infrequently.

I saw all this going on, as I have said, and I did nothing to prevent
it. I suppose because Ruth, curiously enough, seemed to enjoy such
things, and her happiness was always uppermost in my mind. It was for
the attainment of that I was working so hard—to be able, some day, to
give her the things that really would make her happy.

Then, when this had been going on nearly a year, came the climax; and
I learned, with a shock that was all the greater because of its
suddenness, how unjust fate may be to a man who unreservedly trusts
one he loves and who always tries to do the best he can in every way.

The morning of the particular day I have to tell of, I remember, I
went to the office feeling miserably ill. I had taken a sudden chill
the night before, and rose with a slight fever and the start of the
grip or something of the kind.

About four o’clock in the afternoon I felt so badly, I left the office
and went home. Ruth was out and I went into the library, planning to
sleep for an hour or two before dinner. I sat down in a large
easy-chair in a darkened corner of the room, partly sheltered from the
window-light by a screen which stood near by. I was feeling really
very miserable and soon fell into a troubled slumber.

I was awakened by the sound of voices and realized that my wife and
Gerald Rolf were in the room. Evidently they had not seen me. They
were sitting over by the windows and Ruth was serving him tea; I could
just see them from my chair, around the corner of the screen.

The first words that I heard, as soon as I was fully awake,
electrified me. And yet I remained silent, did not make my presence
known then. I do not know why, for I am not one who believes in
eaves-dropping.

It was Rolf’s voice.

“We must face it,” he said. “There is no avoiding it now.”

Ruth did not answer at once. I saw her face was very pale, and her
hand trembled as she poured him a cup of tea.

“You should not have told me you loved me, too,” he went on. “That
would have made it easier. You should have rebuked me—sent me away.”

Another silence.

“I’m going anyhow,” he added.

“Gerald!” She put her hand on his arm.

“There’s no other way, is there?” He met her eyes steadily. “I love
you too much to do anything else but go away. You can understand that,
can’t you? After to-day—after what we’ve confessed to each other.”

I held myself back with an effort. My brain was whirling. That this
impudent boy should dare talk to Ruth—to my wife—like this!

There was another silence. Then I saw Ruth slide her hand down his
forearm until her fingers touched his.

“Have you thought it all over carefully Gerald? Are you sure, quite
sure, that for you to go away—alone—is the best thing—the right
thing?”

She spoke quietly. Even now she seemed to maintain that reserve I
disliked in her so intensely.

“Yes,” he said; his voice sounded very tired. “It’s the only thing to
do now—with honor.”

Honor! He could prate of honor, when by their very words, their
thoughts, they were dragging _my_ honor in the mire!

“I’m not sure.” She spoke softly—so softly I could hardly hear the
words. “I’m not sure, Gerald. I’ve thought about this, too. I’ve seen
it coming—oh yes, I have—for a very long time. I’ve known what was in
your heart—and in mine.

“For you to go away—never to see me again—that may be the best
thing—the right thing for you. It will hurt you, of
course—terribly—for a while. And then, inevitably you—you will find
some one else—some other woman who will make you happy.” Her voice
trembled a little but she still spoke evenly.

“That is what the future holds for you, Gerald. Are you sure you are
not thinking only of yourself when you say we must never see each
other again? What about me?”

“You! Why, Ruth—”

“What does the future hold for me? You haven’t thought of that, have
you, Gerald? Not another love like ours—that is open to you—but not to
me.

“You have known me now two years. You know Will—the sort of man he
is—” I took a new grip on myself at this mention of my name; I would
hear them out.

“You know Will,” she repeated; a new note of passion came into her
voice. “You know how empty, how utterly devoid of everything that
makes a life worth living mine was until you came into it. All that is
in the past. But the future—have you thought what you are condemning
me to in the future? Have you thought of that, Gerald?”

He avoided her eyes. “I love you,” he said. “There will be no other
love for me. I _have_ thought it all over—I have faced it—and I
cannot—will not—take our happiness in dishonor.”

She leaned over the tea-tray and put both her hands on his shoulders,
forcing him to look at her.

“I love you, Gerald,” she said. “Look at me. I love you with all the
love I once thought I felt for him—the love he did not—could
not—understand. Do you realize what you have brought me with your
love? How you have filled that emptiness that was killing me? How you
have—have made my dreams—all those vague little ideals that fill every
girl’s heart—do you realize how you have made them all come true?

“You have won my love, Gerald. Are you going to cast it away—and leave
me nothing—because you say that to take it would be dishonorable?”

Dishonorable! They could talk thus of dishonor! They did not think of
_my_ honor—the honor of William Durrant—that they were dragging about
in the slime of their words. I felt a sudden impulse to leap to my
feet and confront them; but I held myself firm.

“We must think of him, too,” he said. “We cannot build our happiness
upon the wreck of his life. We cannot do that, Ruth—we would lose out
in the end.”

She dropped her hands from his shoulders.

“His life wrecked?” She laughed bitterly. “You do not understand him,
Gerald. Do you think losing me would wreck his life? It would not be
loss of me, but the loss of his wife that would hurt. His wife—his
honor—the honor of William Durrant—that would be attacked. You do not
understand him if you think that.”

Again she put her hands on his shoulders.

“I’m fighting, Gerald,” she went on softly. “Fighting for the only
thing worth while that life holds for me. Are you going to let me go
down beaten—a woman who has lost the only good things—real things—a
woman ever can hope for. The love of a real man. And—and children. To
have children—oh, Gerald, you don’t understand—you don’t understand!”

Her voice broke suddenly and she ended with a sob. I saw his arms go
around her. I pushed my chair back violently and sprang to my feet.

How it must have surprised them to be so abruptly confronted by me,
the one person in the world they had injured, I can imagine. They both
started guiltily at my sudden appearance. Gerald Rolf rose to his
feet; Ruth sat quiet with her eyes fixed upon my face.

I strode across the room. I made up my mind then that there would be
no heroics—no melodrama. The Durrants did not have to descend to that
to protect their honor.

“I have heard all you said,” I began sternly; I looked at each of them
in turn. “I could not help it—sitting there.”

They met my eyes brazenly. There was a moment of silence; I wondered
which of them would dare address me. Then Gerald Rolf spoke.

“What you have heard, Mr. Durrant, is all true—every word of it.
Perhaps it is better that you did hear—for now you can see things as
they really are.” He spoke quite quietly, evidently suppressing with
an effort his agitation and fear of the consequences of his folly.

“Yes, I think now I understand you as you really are—you two. Since
that is so—what do you think you’re going to do about it?” I permitted
myself a veiled sneer with this question.

“You heard me say what I was going to do,” Gerald Rolf answered.

Ruth gave a low exclamation and I turned on her sternly.

“Be quiet,” I said. “We will settle this.” I faced Gerald Rolf again.

“Your decision is very wise,” I said sarcastically. “It is fortunate
that—”

“I said I was going away,” he broke in. “Neither of you will ever
again see or hear of me.”

Again I heard Ruth give a low exclamation.

“I’m leaving her happiness with you.”

I took a menacing step toward him as he said this. He faced me with an
assumption of bravery.

“I’m leaving her to you,” he went on, “What has happened has
been—unfortunate—” His voice faltered, but he drew his lips tightly
together and continued.

“Perhaps it has been for the best—perhaps the future may hold more
happiness for you both than the past gave you.”

I could listen to no more of this.

“Go,” I said sharply.

He picked up his hat and coat which were lying near by. Then, avoiding
Ruth’s eyes, he turned again to me.

“I will,” he said. He hesitated. Then:

“For her sake I hope you will become a man,” he added.

He met Ruth’s tearful eyes in good-by and before I could answer this
last insult, he had left the room.

I sent Ruth to her bedroom immediately; she was sobbing hysterically,
in no fit mental condition for me to talk with then. Some hours
later—after I had dined alone, I went in to see her.

I suffered greatly during those hours—how greatly no one but myself
will ever know. The whole thing came so unexpectedly; I had always
trusted Ruth so implicitly. The fact that a thing so unsavory, so
sordid, should come to me, of all people, almost unnerved me. A
marriage of one of the Durrants to be so besmirched! It was almost
unbelievable.

Such things had happened to others. That I could understand. But when
I had selected Ruth for my wife, I had been confident of her worth—her
breeding, her very manner seemed to make such a catastrophe as this
impossible. Yet it had come and I had to face it—make the best of
it—hide it from the world as my mother would have done. Our marriage
must go on, of course, but it would never be for me that it had been.

I found Ruth sitting on her bed staring blankly before her.

“Well?” I said; I felt that in justice to myself I should be harsh in
this interview. “Well, what have you to say for yourself?”

She stared at me with a light in her eyes that made me doubt her
sanity.

“Nothing,” she said, in that irritating, soft voice of hers. “I don’t
know—I cannot think—what to do.”

I leaned against the wall just inside the doorway. I was quite calm; I
even permitted myself to smile.

“Won’t you go away now?” she added, almost in a whisper. “You must
leave me alone—I must think—decide—”

She seemed to be still on the verge of hysteria and I concluded it
would be useless for me to go on talking then.

“It is a great shock to me,” I said deliberately, “to find that of all
the women in the world I should have chosen one who was bad.”

With that I turned and left her.

I spent that evening at the club—trying to forget in the card-playing
the trouble that had come upon me so abruptly.

The next morning when I went to see Ruth in her room, I found she had
gone, taking with her only a few personal effects! I called up Gerald
Rolf immediately after breakfast; they told me he had left the city.

                  *       *       *       *       *

That was six months ago. She did not come back and she has asked me
now to divorce her. She says she has found happiness, and I suppose
she thinks she has. I shall divorce her, of course. I have always
tried to do the right thing. But the unavoidable publicity will hurt
me terribly.

I have told you what occurred, plainly. I have nothing to add. I tried
my best. Yet, in spite of that—and the injustice of it sometimes makes
me very bitter—my marriage has been a failure.


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the June 12, 1920 issue
of The Argosy magazine.]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARRIAGE OF WILLIAM DURRANT ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
